

===== 2026-03-27 | Friday 27 March, 2026 =====
Big Mac In — of all places — Venice! A pre-Trump example of American ’soft power’? Quote of the Day ”Power, in a nutshell, is the ability to get things done, and politics is the ability to decide which things need to be done.” Zygmunt Bauman Musical alternative to the morning’s radio news Dolores Keane | My Own Dear Galway Bay (Live) Link RIP for a wonderful and much-loved singer, who passed away peacefully on 16 March — in Galway. Long Read of the Day What AI Hypists Miss Perceptive column by Francis Fukuyama Recently I heard a presentation by an engineer from OpenAI about the incredible transformations that will occur once we get to artificial general intelligence (AGI), or even superintelligence. He said that this will quickly solve many of the world’s problems: GDP growth rates could rise to 10, 15, even 20 percent per year, diseases will be cured, education revolutionized, and cities in the developing world will be transformed with clean drinking water for everyone. I happen to know something about the latter issue. I’ve been teaching cases over the past decade on why South Asian cities like Hyderabad and Dhaka have struggled with providing municipal water. The reason isn’t that we don’t know what an efficient water system looks like, or lack the technology to build it. Nor is it a simple lack of resources: multilateral development institutions have been willing to fund water projects for years… You can guess what the reason is. I liked this because I’m continually irritated by the extravagant claims that AI boosters make about AI will do. It suggests that they know little to nothing about history, politics or indeed reality. Books, etc. Having listened to the author on a Santa Fe Institute podcast, I’m contemplating tackling his book . Before diving in, I asked Claude for a summary of any serious reviews that have been published. Here’s its conclusion: The honest summary for you: the book is probably readable if you're comfortable with the ideas of complexity and emergence without needing to follow the mathematics (which stays largely in the background). It's less a popular science book in the Gleick Chaos tradition and more an extended, technically-inflected argument — rewarding if you're prepared to work at it, but not one that holds your hand throughout. My conclusion: worth a try. See you in a couple of weeks! Linkblog Something I noticed, while drinking from the Internet firehose. Why are people taking phone calls on speakers when walking around in public? Turns out I’m not the only one asking the question. This Blog is also available as an email three days a week. If you think that might suit you better, why not subscribe ? One email on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays delivered to your inbox at 5am UK time. It’s free, and you can always unsubscribe if you conclude your inbox is full enough already!

===== 2026-03-30 | Monday 30 March, 2026 =====
Perfect symmetry The Gibbs building, King’s College, Cambridge. It was in a room in the building that the famous confrontation between Ludwig Wittgenstein and Karl Popper at a meeting of the Moral Science club in October 1946 took place. The story is told in Wittgenstein's Poker: The Story of a Ten Minute Argument Between Two Great Philosophers by David Edmonds and John Eidinow. Quote of the Day ”If you feed enough oats to the horse, some will pass through to feed the sparrows.” John Kenneth Galbraith (on the dogma of ‘trickle-down economics) Musical alternative to the morning’s radio news Fáinne Gael an Lae Link Nice orchestral version of an old Irish tune — Bright Ring of the Day Long Read of the Day **Why Are the Wealthy Pouring So Much of Their Wealth into Politics? Useful explanation by Robert Reich, who was Secretary for Labor in Bill Clinton’s administration and a professor at Berkeley. This is from his Substack. Last week, I testified at a congressional hearing organized by Rhode Island Senator Sheldon Whitehouse and New Mexico Senator Martin Heinrich about what Big Oil has gotten from its mammoth contribution to Trump’s 2024 campaign — and how much Americans are paying for this bribe in higher fuel costs and destructive climate change. The short answer: It’s the most corrupt deal in American history. But it’s hardly the only corrupt deal in Washington. Political corruption is growing dramatically — partly because Trump is the most corrupt president in American history. But also because America’s wealthy and their corporations have been pouring more and more money into politics because the return on this “investment” has become so large. I have some good news to share with you about all this. But first I want to sketch the core problem, 1-2-3. Then I’ll suggest a solution… It’s become an endemic problem in British politics over the past two decades. But at least it’s finally been acknowledged as a serious issue. The first point in the overview of the Rycroft report into it reads: This country faces a persistent problem of foreign interests seeking to exert influence on, and to interfere in, our politics. Too much of this is malign and seeks to sow distrust and exacerbate divisions in UK society, with the ultimate aim of undermining confidence in our democracy. And guess who the main beneficiaries of this dodgy largesse have been in the past. And who’s the newest beneficiary on the block? My commonplace booklet How the Spreadsheet changed the world I’ve just come on this blog post by David Oks when I was in my office in College, and as I looked up from it my eye fell on my personal copy of VisiCalc , which I bought for my Apple II in 1979 when it first came out. Sadly, I no longer have that machine, but I remember how radical the program seemed at the time. It was also the reason why many MBA graduates who knew nothing about computing bought the Apple II. I’ll be returning to this subject because, for some of us, there are resonances between the spreadsheet and LLMs. But that’s for another day. This Blog is also available as an email three days a week. If you think that might suit you better, why not subscribe ? One email on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays delivered to your inbox at 5am UK time. It’s free, and you can always unsubscribe if you conclude your inbox is full enough already!

===== 2026-04-01 | Wednesday 1 April, 2026 =====
Figures on a beach You have to squint to see the people. I love the limitless skies and huge beaches of North Norfolk. This is Brancaster. Quote of the Day “America has a choice. We can have great wealth in the hands of a few, or we can have a democracy. But we cannot have both.” Justice Louis Brandeis Musical alternative to the morning’s radio news John Field | Piano Concerto No. 2 in A-Flat Major, H. 31: II. | Poco adagio Link Long Read of the Day Susan Sontag's Playground of Ideas Regular readers will know that I am a great fan of notebooks — and will therefore understand why I alighted on this essay by Jillian Hess, who has been reading Susan Sontag’s notebooks in the UCLA’s archives. Sontag was a compulsive note-taker and left 100 notebooks to her son, David Rieff; on her deathbed she told him that they were “the most important thing” she had bequeathed to him. In the piece there are lots of photographs of pages from the notebooks. I particularly liked the list she made of the writers she needed to deal with in her book Against Interpretation . Hope you enjoy this as much as I did. Books, etc. This arrived the other day. (Publishers often send me unsolicited proof copies of forthcoming titles.) As it happens, it looks interesting and timely, because the future and identity of ‘Europe’ have suddenly become more questionable than any of us supposed until Trump and J.D Vance articulated their contemptuous view of the continent. Glyn Morgan is an historian who points out that the Europe my generation grew up in was essentially a creation of the post-war American state. From 1946 onwards, the U.S. Administration pushed reluctant Europeans to create a federation of democratic states. In doing so, they gave birth to what Morgan called an ‘American Europe’ — a new political order protected by the U.S. military and buoyed by transatlantic trade. In the introductory chapter, he gives an interesting example of how this worked. In 1946, the French government were desperate to secure the forgiveness of their war debts and to secure a loan. They were ultimately successful, but the US government drove a hard bargain, including forcing the French to open their movie theatres to foreign films (essentially US films). As part of the deal, French films were only allowed to be shown for four weeks out of thirteen. It’s not clear whether such a deal counts as an act of an imperial power, an act of accepting an invitation, or an ordinary financial transaction between stronger and weaker parties. Nonetheless, this ‘money for movies’ deal provided the French government with ample warning that they would be playing a subordinate role in the new American Europe . It also, incidentally, led de Gaulle to decide that France needed its own nuclear deterrent. My commonplace booklet Bombing as entertainment Fintan O’Toole has a great column in the Irish Times (behind a paywall) about the war between Trump and Iran. He opens the piece with the previous experiment in bombing countries into oblivion — the allied offensive in Germany during WW2 — and the sobering findings of J.K. Galbraith’s retrospective analysis of that campaign: “as bombing intensified, war production increased.” Galbraith determined that by September 1944, when the US and British bombing campaign reached its peak, German production of military aircraft was “nearly twice what it was before the raids”. But at least in WW2 the carpet bombing had an ostensible purpose, even if it turned out to be cruel and misguided. The difference between then and now, O’Toole writes, is that there is no real pretence of purpose and no real effort at justification. This ostentatious insouciance is novel. When Trump announced that he might bomb Iran’s oil facilities on Kharg Island “a few more times just for fun”, a new note was being sounded in human history – the open relishing of annihilation as entertainment. Entertainment doesn’t have to work. There will be no need to send today’s equivalent of Galbraith to Iran to figure out how effective all this violence has been. Who bothers to ask how effective a giant fireworks display was? It made a big bang, created an exciting spectacle and cost a fortune. It showed off our wealth and power and was fun while it lasted. We bombed our little hearts out. Feedback The photograph of the Gibbs Building in Monday’s edition sparked some memories, and a lovely email from Bill Lubenow, the distinguished historian of British intellectual life. The Popper/Wittgin

===== 2026-04-03 | Friday 3 April, 2026 =====
An orchid by any other name… &#8230; is still an Orchid. Seen on a windowsill in College. Quote of the Day ”Most people would sooner die than think; in fact, they do so.” Bertrand Russell Musical alternative to the morning’s radio news Keith Jarrett | My Wild Irish Rose Link An unexpected find. Long Read of the Day Paul Krugman on Trump’s speech on Wednesday I really enjoy Krugman’s Substack. It’s interesting to see how leaving the NYT (where he had a widely-read column for years) has energised him. Here’s Thursday’s edition : I’m not going to do a regular post today — it’s Thursday morning — because I wanted to wait and see what was in the big speech from Donald Trump last night. And I thought I could just do a short video about it. It turns out that the speech was sort of an anticlimax, although not in a good way. Many people expected Trump to pull the mother of all TACOs, to declare victory and surrender. He did not do that. He declared victory, of course, but he did not actually announce an end to hostilities. On the contrary, he said we’re going to bomb Iran into the Stone Age. So add massive war crimes to your schedule. There is clearly no strategy here. There’s no endgame. There’s nothing. It’s hard to tell, as always, whether Trump is delusional or just completely unable to admit something that he actually knows. One of the moments that really struck me in the speech was him declaring that the whole world was extremely impressed by what happened. He said, "the whole world is watching and they can’t believe the power, strength and brilliance. They just can’t believe what they’re seeing. The world can’t believe what it’s seeing." What it’s seeing is that the world’s greatest military power took on a fourth-rate power. Again, as I said the other day, Iran’s military budget is a rounding error in our military budget. And we lost… Books, etc. Ever since ChatGPT launched I’ve been thinking about Joe Weizenbaum, the computer scientist who created the world’s first chatbot — ELIZA — in the 1960s. And so I dug out his book (which now seems to be out of print, sadly) to re-read it. It’s as good as I remembered. And it’s fascinating to read it with the 20/20 vision of hindsight. It’s an examination of what computers can and cannot do — and, more interesting in the present context — what they should not be used to do. My commonplace booklet The cost of Trump’s war to British households Interesting numbers from the Financial Times The International Energy Agency reports that the UK consumed 4.4mn terajoules of oil and gas products in 2024. Convert this into a rough barrels of oil equivalent and you get 720mn barrels of oil. These have gone up about $40 a barrel since the Iran war started leaving UK consumers $29bn worse off. When converted into sterling, that is hit of about £22bn a year or roughly 0.7 per cent of national income. Linkblog Something I noticed, while drinking from the Internet firehose. The Beginning of Programming as We’ll Know It Given all the nonsense that’s being written about “vibe coding”, I thought that this little essay by a real programmer was a delight. In the wake of AI coding assistants like Claude and Codex, which can seemingly perform the equivalent of a day’s work in a matter of minutes, many of us are wondering if the human role of “computer programmer” is coming to an end. Will the AI bots one day do all the programming for us? Maybe so, but not yet. At this particular moment, human developers are especially valuable, because of the transitional period we’re living through. Just a few years ago, AI essentially could not program at all. In the future, a given AI instance may “program better” than any single human in history. But for now, real programmers will always win. Why? Because we are uniquely positioned to harness most of the power of AI while augmenting it with human taste, wisdom, and caution, among other qualities that an AI is thus far incapable of possessing… Worth a read, if you’re interested in this stuff. Feedback From Mark Allan on bombing as entertainment… Re: Fintan O’Toole’s article that you reference, Adam Tooze’s work on the German economy during WWII suggests a more nuanced picture than Galbraith’s older work. Tooze is bilingual in English and German and used German sources to come to very different conclusions, in his book The Wages of Destruction . The Allied bombing was horrific &#8211; but there is a strong argument that it did hasten the end of the war, crucially 

===== 2026-04-06 | Monday 6 April, 2026 =====
Tulip Mania These amazing multi-coloured tulips which suddenly appeared in our garden a couple of years ago, give one a hint of why the Dutch went mad about the bulbs in the mid-1600s. Quote of the Day ”The modern conservative is engaged in one of man's oldest exercises in moral philosophy; that is, the search for a superior moral justification for selfishness.” John Kenneth Galbraith Musical alternative to the morning’s radio news J.S.Bach | Wachet auf, ruft uns die Stimme (Sleepers Awake) | Munich University choir. Link In the cantata (of which this is just a spectacular part), performed by the Netherlands Bach Society, everything revolves around the parable of the wise and foolish virgins. They wait throughout the night with burning lamps for the arrival of the bridegroom. Five of them have brought along extra oil to keep their lamps burning. The others run out of oil and go off to buy some more. The bridegroom arrives while they are away. Nice to wake up to it on Easter Day! Long Read of the Day It’s astonishing to watch from afar how Trump & Co are getting away with what they’re doing. A lot of it has to do with the extraordinary way that Congress has been cowed. But it also has something to do with the fact that cowardice is contagious (as people discovered in 1930s Germany). This essay by historian Timothy Snyder outlines some of the grim possibilities that faces the American public over the months between now and November. We are seven months away from the most consequential midterm election in the history of the United States. Meanwhile, we are fighting a war. These are the structural conditions for a coup attempt in which a president tries to nullify elections and take permanent power as a dictator. If we see this, we can stop it, overcome the movement that brought us to this point, and make a turn towards something better. President Donald Trump and Secretary of State Pete Hegseth are stuck in the logic of escalation, according to which the feeling of defeat today can be reversed by doing the first thing that comes to mind tomorrow. Trump is surrounded by people who are making money from the war; each day of war strengthens a warmongering lobby with personal access to the president. As the war lengthens, the chance that it will be exploited for a coup attempt increases. Trump tells us that he is chiefly concerned with the permanence of his own comfort and power (think about ballroom and bunker), much of which he will lose when his party is defeated decisively in the midterms. He regularly declares his intention to meddle in the elections. His party backed a bill which would have turned elections into a sham. Trump wants to increase the defense budget by nearly 50% without any review of what the money is for; this is strategic nonsense, and has to be understood as a payoff for the men who, as he imagines, will help him install a dictatorship. Hegseth is meanwhile purging the highest officer ranks of people of principle. It is up to us to put two and two together: Trump will seek to exploit the war (or the next one) to alter the elections. We bear responsibility for what comes next. Chart of the Day Screenshot Which explains why it is important that the UK government continues to support the BBC as negotiations about the renewal of its Charter continue. This Blog is also available as an email three days a week. If you think that might suit you better, why not subscribe ? One email on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays delivered to your inbox at 5am UK time. It’s free, and you can always unsubscribe if you conclude your inbox is full enough already!

===== 2026-04-08 | Wednesday 8 April, 2026 =====
On reflection… Quote of the Day ”Courage is a banal consequence of a lack of imagination”. André Malraux Vintage example of French cynicism. Musical alternative to the morning’s radio news Paul Desmond and the Dave Brubeck Quartet | Take Five Link I’ve often listened to this but knew little about it. So I turned to Wikipedia : The track emerged after Quartet drummer Joe Morello challenged Desmond to compose a piece in 5/4. Brubeck arranged Desmond’s melodies around Morello’s rhythmic ideas, creating a work in ABA ternary form. Its title refers both to the quintuple meter and the colloquial expression "take five," meaning to take a short break. Long Read of the Day AI got the blame for the Iran school bombing. The truth is far more worrying Good Guardian essay by Kevin T. Baker on how “LLMs gone rogue” stories often mislead the public about AI. Same things happen when self-driving cars kill or injure people. It’s always the tech that gets blamed, not the corporations that develop and operate them. On the first morning of Operation Epic Fury, 28 February 2026, American forces struck the Shajareh Tayyebeh primary school in Minab, in southern Iran, hitting the building at least two times during the morning session. American forces killed between 175 and 180 people, most of them girls between the ages of seven and 12. Within days, the question that organised the coverage was whether Claude, a chatbot made by Anthropic, had selected the school as a target. Congress wrote to the US secretary of defense, Pete Hegseth, about the extent of AI use in the strikes. The New Yorker magazine asked whether Claude could be trusted to obey orders in combat, whether it might resort to blackmail as a self-preservation strategy, and whether the Pentagon’s chief concern should be that the chatbot had a personality. Almost none of this had any relationship to reality. The targeting for Operation Epic Fury ran on a system called Maven. Nobody was arguing about Maven. Eight years ago, Maven was the most contested project in Silicon Valley. In 2018, more than 4,000 Google employees signed a letter opposing the company’s contract to build artificial intelligence for the Pentagon’s targeting systems. Workers organised a walk out. Engineers quit. And Google ultimately abandoned the contract. Palantir Technologies, a data analytics company and defence contractor co-founded by Peter Thiel, took it over and spent the next six years building Maven into a targeting infrastructure that pulls together satellite imagery, signals intelligence and sensor data to identify targets and carry them through every step from first detection to the order to strike. The bombing, in which U.S. forces hit the school with Tomahawk missiles while targeting an adjacent military base, killed between 175 and 180 people, most of them young female students. … The building in Minab had been classified as a military facility in a Defense Intelligence Agency database that, according to CNN, had not been updated to reflect that the building had been separated from the adjacent Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps compound and converted into a school, a change that satellite imagery shows had occurred by 2016 at the latest. A chatbot did not kill those children. People failed to update a database, and other people built a system fast enough to make that failure lethal. By the start of the Iran war, Maven – the system that had enabled that speed – had sunk into the plumbing, it had become part of the military’s infrastructure, and the argument was all about Claude. This obsession with Claude is a kind of AI psychosis, though not of the kind we normally talk about, and it afflicts critics and opponents of the technology as fiercely as it does its boosters. You do not have to use a language model to let it organise your attention or distort your thinking. Great piece. And AI psychosis is spreading. Ten metaphors for AI My piece from last Sunday’s Observer with nice illustrations by Chris Riddell. ChatGPT was the first instantiation of AI that most people encountered, and it’s still what most of us regard as “AI﻿”﻿, much as they once learned to refer﻿ to internet search as “googling”. It’s a chatbot﻿, a large language model (LLM) equipped with a conversational interface. And it came as a shock to its early users. As Terrence Sejnowski, an AI pioneer, put it: “A threshold was reached, as if a space alien suddenly appeared that could communicate with us in an eerily human way.” Some aspec

===== 2026-04-10 | Friday 10 April, 2026 =====
Stairway to… … who knows… Quote of the Day ”No solution to the problem of poverty is so effective as providing income to the poor. Whether in the form of food, housing, health services, education or money, income is an excellent antidote for deprivation. No truth has spawned so much ingenious evasion.” John Kenneth Galbraith Musical alternative to the morning’s radio news Albinoni | Adagio in G Minor for solo cello and cello quartet Link See below for why I chose this for today. Long Read of the Day Use it or lose it Margaret Heffernan takes on the challenge of AI. I used to carry about 100 phone numbers in my head: family, friends, my office. Now I carry just one: my husband’s. I can do this because I have effectively outsourced my memory to my phone. I’m comfortable doing so because I backup my phone and if, in a real emergency, I don’t have it, I can call my husband. Other kinds of outsourcing I am not happy with. No matter how well AI agents might get to ‘know’ me, I wouldn’t want it to email my friends or fix a time I can have lunch with my daughter; I’d regard it as crass and impersonal—because it would be crass and impersonal. In the same way, podcasters who invite me onto their show, and then invite me to schedule myself don’t get a reply: I have zero appetite for so transactional an exchange. The smarmy automated invitations to save me time by letting AI summarize long documents (wow at least 10 pages!) just make me mad at the addiction-peddling of Microsoft, a company that, if it truly respected my time, would devote real resources to improving their messy software… I’m with her on Microsoft software. The new Ofcom chair’s first task is to tame Elon Musk My OpEd in last Sunday’s Observer The former television mogul Michael Grade comes to the end of his four-year term as chairman of Ofcom, the UK’s media regulator, later this month. In classic British fashion, the government compiled a shortlist of possible successors drawn straight from central casting: a doughty baroness and a brace of knights. The baroness, Margaret Hodge, was thought by some to be too ancient (though she is of the same vintage as Lord Grade). One of the knights, Jeremy Wright, a Tory MP with a real track record of caring deeply about online harms, was thought to be deemed too dangerous for a timid government. So the position appears to have gone to a City grandee, Ian Cheshire, who has spent his life running big retailers and sitting on the boards of Barclays, Debenhams and BT. As far as I can see, his only obvious qualification for running a media regulator was that he had once been chairman of Channel 4. Presumably, he at least possesses those accessories so prized by the British establishment: a “safe pair of hands”. Which is good, because he'll need them. He inherits a powerful agency that has, since its foundation in 2003, been attracting commitments the way a trawler attracts barnacles… Do read on Books, etc. Screenshot Just downloaded this on the recommendation of a colleague because it touches on things I’m trying to think about at the moment. My commonplace booklet RIP a fine journalist Yesterday, I went to the funeral of a fine journalist in our local church. Burns won two Pulitzer Prizes and a host of other awards during his 40-year career at the New York Times . One of the Pulitzers was for his reporting of the destruction of Sarajevo and the barbaric killings in the war in Bosnia-Herzegovina in 1992. The music at the service was comforting in the Anglican tradition, with Abide with Me , Guide me, O thou great redeemer and Jerusalem (an echo of the last night of the Proms), but the really heart-stopping moment was when a young cellist, Santi Lowe, played Albinoni’s Adagio in G minor , as a tribute to Vedran Smailovic, a musician whom John had immortalised in his reportage. Here’s what he wrote: A Cellist Honors Sarajevo’s Dead As the 155-millimeter howitzer shells whistled down on this crumbling city today, exploding thunderously into buildings all around, a disheveled, stubble-bearded man in formal evening attire unfolded a plastic chair in the middle of Vase Miskina Street. He lifted his cello from its case and began playing Albinoni’s Adagio. There were only two people to hear him, and both fled, dodging from doorway to doorway, before the performance ended. Each day at 4 p.m., the cellist, Vedran Smailovic, walks to the same spot on the pedestrian mall for a concert in honor of Sarajevo’s dead. The spot he has chosen is o

===== 2026-04-13 | Monday 13 April, 2026 =====
No such thing as a free lunch Seen on a street in Brighton in March 2012. Quote of the Day ”Reality has no sense of plot, timing or strategy. It just goes on.” Jack Watling in Statecraft: The New Rules of Power in a Divided World Musical alternative to the morning’s radio news Charles Brown | Driftin' Blues Link Long Read of the Day Mythos and the mispricing of everything The AI firm Anthropic has developed a new model called Mythos, but they haven’t released it to the public. Why? Because Mythos is alarmingly good at hacking. Anthropic claims that its cyber-security research abilities are strong enough that they need to give the software industry as a whole time to prepare. Mythos Preview has already found thousands of high-severity vulnerabilities, including some in every major operating system and web browser. Given the rate of AI progress, it will not be long before such capabilities proliferate, potentially beyond actors who are committed to deploying them safely. This perceptive commentary by Azeem Azhar and Greg Williams ponders some of the implications of a new AI tool that Anthropic has created.One of these implications is that the insurance firms that provide cover against hacking will urgently have to conduct an urgent review of the way they estimate the risk of a successful and damaging attack. The most significant and immediate implication of Mythos is on how we price risk. Critical infrastructure is the asset class that is most exposed and is systemically mispriced. The US utilities sector alone has a $1.5 trillion market capitalization, priced at roughly 22x PE – with cyber risk treated as an incremental operational cost rather than a structural exposure. That frame no longer works in a world where an AI agent can autonomously construct working exploits overnight. My first thought when the story broke is that Anthropic might be hyping up the significance of their new model by implying that it was too dangerous to release. (We’ve seen that stunt before with early versions of OpenAI’s models.) But Simon Willison, my go-to guru in these matters, doesn’t think it’s a stunt. “There’s enough smoke here,” he writes , “that I believe there’s a fire.” It’s not surprising to find vulnerabilities in decades-old software, especially given that they’re mostly written in C, but what’s new is that coding agents run by the latest frontier LLMs are proving tirelessly capable at digging up these issues. I actually thought to myself on Friday that this sounded like an industry-wide reckoning in the making, and that it might warrant a huge investment of time and money to get ahead of the inevitable barrage of vulnerabilities. For “might” read “will”. This is a big deal. In polarised times, AI may be the centrist the world needs Given the existence of what Henry Farrell calls “the AI Fight Club” , I expect that yesterday’s Observer column will get me into trouble with everyone, and especially with those who are critical of AI in its present form. But what the hell: columnists are paid to have opinions. Technology is not the only reason for the increasing polarisation of democracies. The deeper problem is that these societies have for several decades failed to deliver the shared prosperity on which social cohesion depends. As programmers say: inequality is a feature, not a bug of the neoliberal state. The system has been good for some, but countless others have been “left behind”. Social media gives them a voice that is then amplified by tabloid media. So the pool of people producing and broadcasting information has dramatically expanded – as have the range of views and narratives to which people are exposed. The result is a perfect storm of misinformation. In 2025, John Burn-Murdoch, the Financial Times’s data wizard,﻿ did an analysis﻿﻿ that showed extreme political views and narratives are over﻿represented on social media compared with traditional media and cable TV. “Whereas traditional media catered to a range of views,” he reported, “with moderate positions well represented, extreme views – of both left and right – are heavily overrepresented on social media.” Last month, he did a fascinating experiment that built on the earlier study… Do read on . My commonplace booklet Sheila Hayman (Whom God Preserve) was moved to email after reading Margaret Heffernan’s essay (“Use it or Lose it”) on not outsourcing important cognitive tasks to AI. Sheet music downloads, as you probably know, are usually delivered as PDFs. When I o

===== 2026-04-15 | Wednesday 15 April, 2026 =====
The enduring fascination of Harry Potter Every time I pass through King’s Cross I am reminded of it. Must be wonderful to be an author who made such an impact on people. ## Quote of the Day ”The secret to happiness is to face the fact that the world is horrible.” Bertrand Russell Musical alternative to the morning’s radio news Alfred Brendel | Schubert Impromptu Op 90 No 3 D 899 G flat major Link Long Read of the Day Hegseth the Crusader I am temperamentally suspicious of anyone who talks about a ‘crusade’ in an approving light. Yet the US Secretary for Defense, er War, has clearly never read the history of said Crusades, which, among other things took about 200 years and ended with Saladdin’s liberation of Jerusalem in 1187. What I hadn’t fully realised, though, was the extent to which he is a religious fanatic. Accordingly, I’m grateful to Frank Bruni for putting me right . Hegseth volubly likened the rescue of an American airman shot down over Iran to the Resurrection of Jesus. “A pilot reborn, all home and accounted for, a nation rejoicing,” Hegseth said at a news conference. “God is good.”. Hegseth has a tattoo on his right biceps that says “Deus vult,” Latin for “God wills it.” He has described that phrase as a battle cry during the Crusades, which, of course, pitted Christians against Muslims. He titled his 2020 book “American Crusade” — notice any fixation? — and wrote in it that Americans must fight “like our fellow Christians 1,000 years ago.” He belongs to the Communion of Reformed Evangelical Churches, which exalts patriarchy and descends from a movement that argues that the Bible’s edicts should prevail over secular law. He tugs church into state. As Michelle Boorstein wrote recently in The Washington Post: “Every month at the Pentagon, Hegseth hosts evangelical worship services that legal experts say are unprecedented. His social media profile and public comments routinely espouse his understanding of Christianity, which is one that would dominate American life and cast those who disagree with him as God’s enemies. He has brought clergy from his small Christian denomination to preach at the Pentagon, including a prominent pastor who says women shouldn’t have the right to vote.” How exactly did he become secretary of defense, to use the traditional title for the job? How indeed? Especially given that a New Yorker investigation reported that he had been forced out of previous leadership positions for financial mismanagement, sexist behaviour, and being repeatedly intoxicated on the job. Chart of the Day What’s happened to the platform previously known as Twitter? In other words, it’s become a freak-show. “Without really wanting to comment on individual accounts,” writes Nate Silver, the liberal-leaning accounts that remain prominent on Twitter aren’t much better. They’re partisan and combative, sometimes peddling misinformation. They’re almost like a dark-mirror-world, Waluigi version of the conservative “influencers”, crafted in Elon’s jaded image of what liberals are like. It’s no coincidence that one of the most successful ones is the Gavin Newsom Press Office account, which literally mimics President Trump’s style in a sometimes funny, sometimes cringeworthy way. Source My commonplace booklet Henry Oliver has a thoughtful post about Harold Bloom (accurately titled “The Man Who Had Read Everything”) which contains this endearing quote from a letter to the A.R Ammons in 1969. An odd note, this—I came home just now from an exhausting Grad. Seminar in Poetic Influence—exhausting because a waste of spirit somehow—and I sat down—with cigar and scotch and soda—in my deep armchair in the living room—Daniel playing outside—David in the kitchen fingerpainting, Jeanne there too cooking chicken pilaf—and I turned to my downstairs copy of Ammons’ Selected Poems (I’ve got an upstairs copy for reading in my study—every house should have 2 Ammonses) and I read “Bridge”—because the book fell open to it—a poem I hadn’t been open to before—and Arch, it opened to me and found me—immensely beautiful, healing , Archie, as only Wordsworth and Stevens and Ammons can heal . I am very moved, very, very moved. It is a great poem, Archie, and if I had written it—rather than wasting my spirit (such as it is) in tiring seminars and exegeses we don’t need —I would feel blessed, Archie, as you must sometimes feel in spite of yourself. Ammons was a poet an professor of English at Cornell. “Bridge” is the poem Triphammer Bridge: I won

===== 2026-04-17 | Friday 17 April, 2026 =====
Regime change This Private Eye cover made my day. Quote of the Day ”What is the difference between a Nazi and a dog? The Nazi lifts his arm.” Viktor Borge Musical alternative to the morning’s radio news Clannad | Tá’ Mé Mo Shuí (I am Awake) Link Eerily beautiful Irish love song about a lad who can't sleep because he's missing his lass. Long Read of the Day The Boiling Point A sobering post by Mike Brock There is a concept in the sciences known as a phase transition. It describes the threshold at which an otherwise stable system suddenly rearranges itself into a completely different stable pattern. Water freezes. Not gradually — at a precise threshold, the molecular structure reorganizes and something categorically different exists where something else was before. The same phenomenon governs the lifecycle of stars: our Sun has been in its main sequence phase for five billion years, burning hydrogen in a stable equilibrium, and one day that equilibrium will fail and the Sun will become something entirely unlike what it has been — not a gradual decline but a reorganization into a different state. I am watching a phase transition in American society. And I am not sure the people responsible for producing the conditions that are driving it understand what they are looking at. … In the sciences, a system approaching a phase transition shows specific signatures before the transition occurs. It becomes increasingly sensitive to perturbations. Small inputs produce large outputs. The fluctuations grow. The system’s behavior becomes harder to predict from its prior behavior. Scientists call this critical slowing down — the system is losing its ability to return to equilibrium after disturbance. On TikTok and social media, something that was once rare has become common: men crying on camera. Sharing their economic fears. Talking about what it feels like to not be able to provide. Women breaking down on video — “I’m so screwed, y’all” — after losing jobs and running out of money. Young women crying at the gas pump because the number on the screen doesn’t leave enough for food. The establishment has a category for this. It is called “economic anxiety.” It is a term that converts the specific, felt, real experience of not being able to make the arithmetic work into a demographic variable suitable for polling analysis. That is not what this is. This is people, in public, telling the truth about their lives because the pressure has built past the point where keeping up appearances is possible. This is the sound a society makes when the gap between the declared reality and the actual reality becomes too large to maintain in private. And it’s what our much-vaunted liberal democracy has produced. Books, etc. After Trump’s inauguration last January, when I was trying to figure out if we were witnessing a revolution or a coup, I suddenly remembered this lovely, wise, book , and dug it out. It’s written as an extended letter to an (unnamed) friend who had bombarded him with questions about “the riddles of Poland and Europe after the revolution of 1989 until I was too dazed to answer any of them properly”. So he retreated to the peace and quiet of his study in St Antony’s College, Oxford, and started to write. The continuing conundrum, he concluded, which will plague peoples everywhere in Europe, will be how to balance the need for economic growth with the desire for social justice while building authentic and enduring democratic institutions. As the liberal democracy celebrated by Francis Fukuyama in 1989 has been steadily eroding, I’m finding that Dahrendorf’s reflections improve with our newly-acquired hindsight. My commonplace booklet Rory McIlroy Does It the Hard Way (Again) I was once a very keen golfer (I played for my university as an undergraduate) and although I more or less gave it up when I came to Cambridge in 1968, it’s still the only game I pay attention to. Which explains why I so enjoyed this lovely account by Elizabeth Nelson of Rory McIlroy’s second victory in the Masters last weekend. Sample: You know when the hard-boiled detective grabs the prime suspect by the scruff of the neck in the interrogation room and says: “We can do this the hard way, or we can do this the easy way”? Rory Fuckin’ McIlroy never does it the easy way. On Sunday, when he became just the fourth golfer in history to win back-to-back green jackets at the Masters, he kept us in suspense until the very end. Standing on the 18th tee, following a week of

===== 2026-04-20 | Monday 20 April, 2026 =====
Zoombini A photograph of the most remarkable and intelligent cat I’ve ever known, taken in 2012. She died five years ago, and I miss her still. Quote of the Day ”A perfect martini should be made by filling a glass with gin then waving it in the general direction of Italy.” Noel Coward Musical alternative to the morning’s radio news Bach | Cello Suite 1 | Pablo Casals Link Long Read of the Day You Are Not a Function If, like me, you think that universities are heading into deep trouble, then this thoughtful essay by Brendan McCord might be helpful — especially given the way the Humanities are being marginalised. It starts back in 1809 when Prussia was trying to rebuild after a traumatic defeat by Napoleon and the task of designing the new system of education fell to a thirty-two-year-old diplomat named Wilhelm von Humboldt. He proposed a university where professors and students would be joined in the pursuit of knowledge, unconstrained by political demands. In a defeated nation hungry for officers and administrators, he argued for ‘formation’ before function. In other words, he came up with the idea that a human being is more like a tree than a steam engine (as John Stuart Mill put it). And the modern research university, with its union of teaching and inquiry, its seminar culture, and its commitment to academic freedom is a direct descendant from that idea. But it’s now losing the plot by forgetting the question that Humboldt asked: What is a human being, that education should serve it? In a world where your economic value can evaporate overnight, “Become a whole person” sounds like advice from someone who has never worried about next month’s rent. The utilitarian case for education has the force of necessity behind it. For millions of people, making yourself useful is what responsibility to their families demands. Yet if the response to being replaceable is always to train for a different function, you have entered a race you structurally cannot win. The principle that makes your education valuable is the same principle that makes you disposable the moment the function migrates. The scramble into computer science was an early sign of the trap: students rushed toward the field that seemed safest, and then AI began destabilizing the very functions it trained them to perform. The flight to function looks rational from inside it; that is what makes it a trap. Why?. Because once you define what the formed person looks like, you have replaced formation with training. AI has some grim lessons in store for such malformed graduates. Tech bros, beware: resistance to AI moves from theory to direct action Yesterday’s Observer column On the morn­ing of 10 April, a guy threw a molotov cock­tail at the exter­ior gate of the man­sion of OpenAI boss Sam Alt­man in San Fran­cisco. Two days later, two people tried a spot of drive-by shoot­ing at the house. Also this month, an Indi­ana­polis city coun­cil­lor was woken by 13 gun­shots and found a note on his door­step say­ing: “No data cen­ters”. It turns out that, days before the lat­ter shoot­ing, the coun­cil­lor atten­ded a met­ro­pol­itan devel­op­ment com­mis­sion meet­ing to advoc­ate for the rezon­ing of a prop­erty where the developer Met­robloks was seek­ing to build a data­centre. Mean­while, Maine is poised to become the first US state to pass a tem­por­ary ban on data­centre con­struc­tion. It’s just the first of at least 11 more states – Geor­gia, Mary­land, Michigan, New Hamp­shire, New York, Oklahoma, South Car­o­lina, South Dakota, Ver­mont, Vir­ginia and Wis­con­sin – that have pro­posed to restrict or ban data­centre devel­op­ment. What we’re see­ing are the first stir­rings of anti-AI pop­u­lism, a volat­ile move­ment driven by eco­nomic des­per­a­tion and a dis­trust of tech elites. In that con­text, the attacks on Alt­man’s home and a coun­cil­lor who advoc­ated for a data­centre look like early sig­nals of a seis­mic shift from cri­tique to dir­ect action. Even as they beef up their per­sonal secur­ity, the tech bros are baffled and hurt by this devel­op­ment. But, really, they only have them­selves to blame. From the out­set in 2022, their mes­saging about the tech­no­logy has been infant­ile… Read on (Pdf version here ). My commonplace booklet Two caveats on Orban’s defeat. The first from John Quiggan: Most important, but less clear, are the implications for Trumpism in the US. The result is a double-edged sword. By showing that even an entrenched regime like O

===== 2026-04-22 | Wednesday 22 April, 2026 =====
The view from here We’re in the Lake District for a few days, and a bit off its beaten tracks. Bliss! Quote of the Day ”The quiet truth about AI is that it doesn't replace the thing that was hard. It replaces the thing that was slow.” Joost Boer He’s right. And that has implications that tech companies (and governments) are busy trying to ignore. Ralph Vaughan Williams | The Lake in the Mountains Link Seemed appropriate for the tranquillity all around us here. Long Read of the Day Austerity creates fascism Splendid blast from Cory (Whom God Preserve) My concern about a massive collapse in the capital markets isn't that workers will suffer directly. Despite all the Wonderful Life rhetoric about your money being in Joe's house and the Kennedy house and Mrs Macklin's house, the reality is that the median US worker has $955 saved for retirement. You could nuke the whole financial system and not take a dime out of most workers' pockets: No, the thing that has me terrified about AI is that when it craters and takes the economy with it, that we will respond the same way we have during every financial crisis of the 21st century: with austerity, and austerity breeds fascism. There's a direct line from every K-shaped recovery to every strong-man who's currently sending masked gunmen into the streets. The Hungarian dictator Viktor Orban rose to power after people who'd been suckered into denominating their mortgages in Swiss francs lost their houses when the currency markets moved suddenly, because the swindlers who'd sold them those mortgages took the position that wanting to live somewhere automatically made you an expert in forex risk, so caveat fuckin' emptor, baby… It’s a memorable piece, not least because it makes good use of a landmark research paper — “Public Service Decline and Support for the Populist Right” which looks at the linkage between austerity and support for fascists. When public services go wrong, people don't always know who to blame, but they definitely notice that something is going wrong, so when public services fail, people stop trusting the state, and that social contract starts to fray. They start to suspect that elites are lining their pockets rather than managing the system, and they "withdraw their support" for the system. Which makes them easy meat for Farage & Co? Linkblog Something I noticed, while drinking from the Internet firehose. Notes on Hong Kong by Rohit Krishnan. I’ve never been there, but if I were going this is what I’d bring. This Blog is also available as an email three days a week. If you think that might suit you better, why not subscribe ? One email on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays delivered to your inbox at 5am UK time. It’s free, and you can always unsubscribe if you conclude your inbox is full enough already!

===== 2026-04-24 | Friday 24 April, 2026 =====
The Doll’s House Yesterday we walked to Hill Top House , the rural retreat of the writer Beatrix Potter, whose books were a staple of my childrens’ early lives. It’s an interesting and evocative place and though I’d been there once (after the pandemic) I thought it’d be nice to revisit, not least because of the huge (and beneficial) impact she had on the Lake District (where we’re on holiday). Her house is now maintained by the National Trust (to which she bequeathed it) and is kept as it was when she died. This time I had a single objective — to photograph the doll’s house in one of the first-floor rooms. Screenshot The background story of the doll’s house is interesting. According to Wikipedia , her 1904 book, The Tale of Two Bad Mice , was inspired by the conjunction of two things: two mice caught in a cage-trap in her cousin's home; and a doll's house being constructed by her editor and publisher, Norman Warne, as a Christmas gift for his niece Winifred. The tale is about two mice who vandalise a doll's house. After finding the food on the dining room table made of plaster, they smash the dishes, throw the doll clothing out the window, tear the bolster, and carry off a number of articles to their mouse-hole. When the little girl who owns the doll's house discovers the destruction, she positions a policeman doll outside the front door to ward off any future depredation. The two mice atone for their crime spree by putting a crooked sixpence in the doll's stocking on Christmas Eve and sweeping the house every morning with a dust-pan and broom. “The doll’s house contents are really important,” writes the National Trust’s Curator, “because they feature so strongly in one of Beatrix’s best loved tales but also because of the significance to her life and her relationship with Norman Warne” (who tragically died shortly after proposing marriage to her). It took around 300 hours of work to conserve the doll’s house and 73 of the items it contains. The house needed work to stabilise part of the decorative roof edge as well as filling cracks and previous screw holes. Torn wallpaper was repaired, and areas of lifting vinyl floors were tackled along with carpet repairs. Many of the objects in the house needed work to stabilise and prevent further deterioration as well as reattaching broken or loose pieces before detailed cleaning. Silk cushion covers on the furniture were repaired and dry cleaned using micro-vacuum cleaners. Clearly, one of the talents required in conservators is an infinite capacity for taking pains. This blogger would definitely not qualify. Quote of the Day “The main purpose of the stock market is to make fools of as many men as possible.” Bernard Baruch Musical alternative to the morning’s radio news The Byrds | Ballad Of Easy Rider Link Damn: if I’m not careful I’ll be re-reading Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance next. Long Read of the Day What if we just stopped hyperscaling? Fabulous essay by John Quiggin, the economist. The AI industry today is dominated by a relentless pursuit of scale—bigger models, more data, and ever-larger compute clusters. NVIDIA’s H100 GPU, the current gold standard for AI compute, exemplifies this trend. Each H100 consumes around 1 kilowatt of power and costs tens of thousands of dollars, yet the world’s tech giants deploy millions of these chips to train and run massive AI models. The energy footprint is staggering, the hardware costs are astronomical, and the environmental impact is growing. This hyperscaling model is unsustainable, but it’s the engine driving NVIDIA’s $100 billion data center business. But what if we stopped hyperscaling? What if, instead of constantly training new, larger models, we focused on running the ones we already have—and made them smarter with real-time internet search? This is the world of inference-only AI, where existing models like Llama 3 8B or Mistral 7B are deployed at scale with retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) to keep them up-to-date. The implications are profound: hardware needs shrink by orders of magnitude, energy consumption plummets, and AI becomes a sustainable, affordable utility… Read on. I suspect that if the AI industry is to become profitable in the long run, this is how it has to evolve. Books, etc. Screenshot This looks really interesting: a book about where we might look for ways of revitalising democracy and running societies in ways that improve life for the majority of citizens. The Anglosphere (UK and US) is h

===== 2026-04-27 | Monday 27 April, 2026 =====
No mist without fire? I know, it looks like smoke, but it’s really an early morning mist. Quote of the Day ”I always want to say to people who want to be rich and famous: ‘Try being rich first.’ See if that doesn’t cover most of it. There’s not much downside to being rich, other than paying taxes and having your relatives ask you for money. But when you become famous, you end up with a 24-hour job. . . . The only good thing about fame is that I’ve gotten out of a couple of speeding tickets. I’ve gotten into a restaurant when I didn’t have a suit and tie on. That’s really about it.” Bill Murray Many years ago, when I was the Observer ’s TV critic, I turned down a big TV job because I didn’t want to be recognised in the street. Best decision I ever made. Musical alternative to the morning’s radio news Rufus & Martha Wainwright | Sweet Thames, flow softly Link Long Read of the Day How Brexit Created Britain’s New Political Tribes As we approach the tenth anniversary of the Brexit referendum, this is a really insightful essay by James Tilley, who teaches Politics at Oxford, about the new book he’s written with Sara Hobolt: Tribal Politics: How Brexit Divided Britain , which is based on survey research indicating that Britain is as polarised as the US. We find that Remainers and Leavers were consistently a lot more attached to their identity than were Conservative or Labour supporters. And those scores have been very stable over the last ten years. People like people like them. And they define ‘like them’ in terms of their Brexit tribe. All our measures also show that people not only disagree with, but really dislike, people on the other side and typically say that they have a ‘cold or unfavourable feeling’ towards their rival group. Again, this has barely changed since 2016. Third, people engage in the same sort of motivated reasoning that we see for party identities. At the most basic level, any group identity that is strongly held will provide motivations to think that the other side is inferior and should be avoided. As our data shows, huge majorities say that their own Brexit group is intelligent, honest and selfless, while the other side is stupid, dishonest and selfish. In fact, when we asked people to describe the other side in their own words, a quarter simply listed bad things and another quarter did that in addition to other information (to give you a flavour, one of the pithiest responses was simply ‘selfish dicks’). However we measure it, we find widespread prejudice. And we also find lots of evidence of discrimination: people actively wanted to avoid everyday interactions with people on the rival team… This is an interesting read for those of us who fondly imagine that the US has a monopoly on polarisation. It also helps to explain why the traditional UK political parties are losing their grip on — not to mention attractiveness to — voters. Anthropic’s Mythos AI heralds a new era of cybersecurity warfare My most recent Observer column : Mythos, says Collins dictionary, is “the complex of beliefs, values, attitudes, etc, characteristic of a specific group or society”. It is also the name Dario Amodei’s Anthropic has given to its latest AI model – officially Claude Mythos Preview – which has arrived as a bombshell, and whose reverberations ﻿we will soon begin to notice. How come? It turns out that Mythos, which is a general-purpose large language model (LLM), is also a world-class hacker. Or, to put it less luridly, it is striking for its ability to discover security vulnerabilities in networked systems and exploit them. Anthropic said﻿ that it has already found thousands of high-severity vulnerabilities, including some “in every major operating system and web browser”﻿. It added: “Given the rate of AI progress, it will not be long before such capabilities proliferate, potentially beyond actors who are committed to deploying them safely.” It also said: “AI have reached a level of coding capability where they can surpass all but the most skilled humans at finding and exploiting software vulnerabilities.” Discovery of this capability persuaded Anthropic that it would be unsafe to launch Mythos on an unsuspecting world. Accordingly, the company decided on ﻿Project Glasswing﻿; the codename for making the model available only to a number of large – and presumably trusted – corporate bodies… Read on pdf version: Anthropic’s Mythos AI heralds a new era of cybersecurity &#8230; Linkblog Something I noticed, while drin

===== 2026-04-29 | Wednesday 29 April, 2026 =====
Sheepishly Our nearest neighbour in the Lake District, photographed shortly before we left for home. Herdwicks (which are native to the Lakes) are such beautiful animals. Quote of the Day ”It is discouraging how many people are shocked by honesty and how few by deceit.” Noël Coward Musical alternative to the morning’s radio news Lord Inchquin Link One of my favourite Irish airs. Long Read of the Day When Decentralization Fails This essay by Alex Chalmers is a long, long read, but in a way that’s appropriate because it addresses one of the biggest problems that societies will have to face (assuming we survive climate catastrophe), namely how to govern two kinds of technologies that we have recently invented — AI and (although Chalmers doesn’t address it directly) synthetic biology. In a way the only comparable problem the world has had to address — at least in my lifetime — was the challenge of controlling nuclear weapons, and to date we have just-about managed that (though there have been a few close calls). These newer technologies are different in one important respect, though. Whereas nukes were the sole prerogative of nation states, AI and synthetic biology are the property of giant corporations. And the bi-polar world in which the nuclear threat evolved (and was to some extent resolved) is fragmenting into a potentially chaotic, multipolar one. Chalmers ends on an interesting note. Most governance questions are deployment problems where domain-specific knowledge is generated through practice — oncologists, not central regulators, hold the relevant knowledge for AI in cancer medicine, say. Existing institutions (professional bodies, universities, malpractice insurers, procurement officers, open-source communities) can govern within their domains, with state or interstate coordination reserved for the genuinely cross-cutting issues like frontier model weights. This won't fix production-side concentration of corporate power, but it can build countervailing power on the deployment side — so that AI giants have to satisfy many authorities rather than capturing one regulator. What happens at the deployment level of these technologies is where humans — and democracies — still have critical leverage and power, if they choose to exercise it. I hope you can find time for it. My commonplace booklet Stockholm syndrome in Mar-a-Lago: The belief that "something must be done" and the sanewashing of economic policy in the age of Trump Historian Adam Tooze, after reprising arguments that were largely incomprehensible to me, provides this helpful summary at the end: None of us really knows where this clown car is headed and what drives it on its crazy course. It seems like a mystery even to many on board. Quite reasonably we look for elements of rationality. We ask: who inside MAGA 2.0 is thinking and what are their thoughts? We then relate that to our own efforts to diagnose America’s history and the history of the world economy. At the very least we need to explain how Trump 2.0 happened. Sometimes we will find a match between a strand of policy from inside MAGA and our own analysis and it is tempting to label that as “MAGA for thinking people” and to look for continuities with the Biden team etc. That mode of analysis is reasonable. To historically minded people it is appealing for obvious reasons. But it puts us at risk of is underestimating the radicalism of the break marked by the Trump administration. In search of historical context we miss what is most historically significant. We avoid facing the conclusion that the vision of a Mar-a-Lago Accord may have more in common with grift, a protection racket or a facelift pandering to the ignorant vanity of an old man than with economic policy as we have hitherto known it. Faced with Trump, the risk is that conventional realism is a form of escapism. Which, oddly enough, is what I’ve felt since Trump took office. Linkblog To see or not to see? Every single Shakespeare play – ranked! This is truly wonderful: the great theatre critic Benedict Nightingale’s analysis of all Shakespeare’s plays, in order of his preferences. Many thanks to Christine Happel for alerting me to it. Feedback Lots of interesting emails arrived about the problems of being famous. Reading them made me remember Nuala Ó'Faolain , who was a great — and very well-known — Irish feminist when I was a student. A publisher asked her to write an autobiographical introduction to a collection of her newspaper columns, 

===== 2026-05-01 | Friday 1 May, 2026 =====
Conkers Hitherto, it had never occurred to me that Chestnut trees might be interesting at this time of year. Until yesterday. Quote of the Day ”This damp little shambles of a democracy on the edge of the Western world”. Nuala Ó’Faolain on her (and my) native land, which is currently a bit of shambles . Musical alternative to the morning’s radio news Mozart | Giunse alfin il momento&#8230;Deh vieni non tardar |Marriage of Figaro | Regula Mühlemann Link Long Read of the Day The King, the Queen, and the Ballroom Blitz Tina Brown on song about King Charles’s visit to the Augean stable that is the current White House. God, it was nice for British embassy guests to see King Charles and Queen Camilla in person yesterday afternoon! As the royal pair emerged with elderly, familiar grace onto the portico steps of the residence and stood side by side, rooted in history, the volatile Washington circus finally came to a stop. Two teary national anthems were played. There was the sweet smell of freshly mown grass, small sandwiches were passed, and the better-dressed-than-usual DC crowd waited respectfully in assembled “pods” for Their Majesties to unfreeze their pose and descend to emit magical civility. Given that the last time many in this crowd had seen each other was underneath a table in the Washington Hilton ballroom as a would-be presidential assassin at the White House Correspondents’ Dinner stormed a checkpoint and was wrestled to the ground, the embassy garden party was mint tea for the nerves. Everyone was comparing their Saturday night vignettes of Secret Service heroes vaulting over scattering silverware or the sight of a disorientated RFK Jr. being armpit-lifted out of danger with his actress wife scurrying behind. Right before the king and queen deplaned at Joint Base Andrews, Trump’s creamy-faced flak Karoline Leavitt turned her valedictory, pre-maternity leave speech from the podium into a gargantuan gaslight session of the traumatized press, blaming Saturday night’s violence on hate-filled discourse purveyed by Democrats and the media. Wait, wasn’t it her boss, Donald J. Trump, who godfathered the Jan. 6 mayhem, excoriated the murdered Rob and Michele Reiner last December for having “Trump derangement syndrome,” and commemorated the death of former FBI director Robert Mueller in March with the Truth Social post “Good”? Trump himself in his post-dinner press conference took his propensity to attract assassins as proof he is a president of consequence, like Lincoln (but not, apparently, like Gerald Ford, who nearly took a bullet from Manson mini-maniac Squeaky Fromme). On the embassy lawn in the spring sunshine, the king glided through the parting crowd as if he were on casters. He first greeted a bipartisan cluster of ingratiating pols that included gangly Scott Bessent, stocky Mike Johnson, Steve Miller with his shiny cue ball head, and Nancy Pelosi, her four-inch heels defiantly sinking in the grass. Do read on. There are interesting stings in the tail. Books, etc. This is a remarkably ambitious book by an Oxford scholar I’ve been following since her first book came out in 2020 (when she gave a presentation about it to our — then new — research centre ). Here’s how she describes it in the Prelude: This is a technology book, because artificial intelligence is the new Oracle of Delphi and executives the new prophets. It's a business book, and personal development one, because it explores prophecy as an industry, with a focus on how to avoid falling for false prophets in a "data-driven" world. It explores the history of prediction – from ancient oracles to the development of measurements and probability – to argue that prophecies are more often than not power plays in disguise. It's a political treatise on how prediction serves social control. Like I said, ambitious. My commonplace booklet Thank God for Private Eye ! Linkblog Something I noticed, while drinking from the Internet firehose. King Charles’s speech to Congress Quite classy, IMHO, especially in current circumstances. Worth watching. Link This Blog is also available as an email three days a week. If you think that might suit you better, why not subscribe ? One email on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays delivered to your inbox at 5am UK time. It’s free, and you can always unsubscribe if you conclude your inbox is full enough already!

===== 2026-05-04 | Monday 4 May, 2026 =====
Refractive Jellyfish One of the most enigmatic photographs I’ve ever taken. It looks as though someone’s monocle has fallen on the sand. But it’s just a jellyfish. Taken on a beach in March 2012. Quote of the Day ”Familiarity breeds contempt, but without a little familiarity it's impossible to breed anything.” Noël Coward Musical alternative to the morning’s radio news Vivaldi | Nulla in mundo pax sincera | RV r630 | Marie Lys, soprano Link Music for a May morning. Long Read of the Day How Charles III Quietly Filleted Donald Trump in His Own House You will remember from Friday’s edition that I liked the King’s speech to both houses of Congress. As it happens, I didn’t know the half of it. This elegant piece by Dean Blundell masterfully fills in the picture. There is an old British art form that Americans, despite our many gifts, have never quite mastered. It is the art of saying terrible things about a man while he smiles and nods, convinced you are paying him a compliment. King Charles III flew across the Atlantic on April 28, 2026, walked into the United States Capitol, and gave a master class channelling his inner Mark Carney. By the time he sat down to dinner at the White House that evening, he had — without raising his voice, without breaking decorum, without uttering Donald Trump’s name a single time in anger — done something no Democrat, no journalist, and no foreign leader has managed in a decade. He made the President of the United States look small in his own ballroom. And he did it with jokes. It’s a lovely essay. Here are some gems from it: A President who insists he is not a king, in a country whose entire founding mythology is built on the violent rejection of monarchy, was about to throw open the doors of the White House for an actual hereditary king — the head of the same throne the colonies revolted against in 1776 — and the White House communications team was, at that very moment, posting a photograph of the two men captioned “TWO KINGS.” Or this: Charles took the rostrum at 3:09 p.m. He spoke for roughly 25 minutes. He received multiple standing ovations, including from Democrats who have spent the past year searching for someone, anyone, capable of saying out loud what they have been thinking. Or this: The single most electric moment of the speech came when Charles invoked the post-9/11 alliance — when NATO triggered Article Five for the first time in its history to defend the United States — and then pivoted, with the unhurried grace of a surgeon, into the present. Today, he told the chamber, that same unyielding resolve is needed for the defence of Ukraine and her most courageous people, in order to secure a truly just and lasting peace. Members of Congress rose to their feet. Both parties. Together. In a Congress that cannot agree on a lunch order, Republicans and Democrats stood shoulder to shoulder to applaud a foreign monarch publicly contradicting the foreign policy of the man who had hosted him for breakfast. The biggest surprises of all, though, come later in the piece, when Blundell turns to the speech Charles delivered at the White House dinner that evening. Charles then pivoted to Trump’s most cherished domestic vanity project: the demolition of the East Wing of the White House to make way for a $400 million ballroom Trump has been building, financed in significant part by private donors and corporate interests, against the howling objections of historians and preservationists. He could not help noticing, the king observed dryly, the “readjustments” to the East Wing. He was, he said, sorry to report that the British had made their own attempt at real estate redevelopment of the White House in 1814. This was the moment of the night. In 1814, during the War of 1812, British soldiers marched into Washington and burned the White House to the ground. Charles — heir to that throne, head of that state — stood in the rebuilt building, looked at the demolition crew’s work outside, and gently equated Donald Trump’s signature architectural legacy with an act of foreign arson. The line was so good it hurt. The room — Fox hosts, cabinet secretaries, billionaires — laughed because there was nothing else to do… This is writing of a very high order. Hope you enjoy it as much as I did. My commonplace booklet In his current FT column, Tim Harford asks if his intuition that politics is more emotionally fraught than it used to be is accurate. He points to a recent working paper by a group of Harvard Resea

===== 2026-05-06 | Wednesday 6 May, 2026 =====
Iris surveillance These crept up on us in our front garden. We went to the Lake District for a week and when we arrived what should we find but these show-offs. Quote of the Day “The saddest aspect of life right now is that science gathers knowledge faster than society gathers wisdom.” Isaac Asimov The problem seems to have got worse over the years since he made the observation! Musical alternative to the morning’s radio news Joan Armatrading | Love And Affection Link Long Read of the Day A Rash Conclusion By Paolo Valdemarin. Not such a Long Read , but to the point, and perceptive. Everyone worries about AI replacing doctors. After 24 hours in the hands of the NHS, I think they’re looking in the wrong direction. GP, A&E, then other parts of the hospital. Every shift, a new doctor. Every new doctor, the same questions. The same story, retold from the top. Every single one of them then took a picture of my rash with their phone. The first GP I saw actually had an AI assistant. It recorded our conversation and drafted a letter, which he printed on that grey recyclable paper the NHS uses for everything and which absolutely no one in the chain that followed ever read… The NHS is like many other large organisations, unable to join the administrative dots. Sometimes, it’s maddening to have to watch it especially since no rocket science required to fix it. I guess the problem is that nobody ‘owns’ the co-ordination problem. My commonplace booklet I really liked this New Yorker cover (captioned “War-a-Lago”), which was clearly referencing General George Patton’s practice of standing upright in a Jeep during WW2 while reviewing troops. After the Normandy invasion he was given command of the US Third Army which went deep into Nazi Germany. During the Allied occupation of Germany, Patton was named military governor of Bavaria, but was relieved for making aggressive statements towards the Soviet Union and questioning denazification. He also held antisemitic views and made derogatory statements about Jewish people. Linkblog Something I noticed, while drinking from the Internet firehose. Why the voice note craze is yet to truly explode in Britain From BBC News … On an August day in 2013, WhatsApp, the messaging app now owned by Meta, made an announcement. With relatively little fanfare, they revealed the voice note, the messaging feature that lets you send a clip of your own voice to friends and family. ”We know there's no substitute for hearing the sound of a friend or family member's voice," the company enthused in a press release. Thirteen years on, receiving a 10-minute clip from a friend, telling you about a complex family feud or workplace drama, is an experience that is loved by some and loathed by others. In places like India, Mexico, Hong Kong and the United Arab Emirates, voice notes are almost matching the popularity of written texts as the preferred form of electronic communication. But curiously, the truth is that compared to many places, Britain never seems to have quite caught the voice note bug. I don’t think I’ve ever sent one. But my sisters love the medium and use it quite a bit. This Blog is also available as an email three days a week. If you think that might suit you better, why not subscribe ? One email on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays delivered to your inbox at 5am UK time. It’s free, and you can always unsubscribe if you conclude your inbox is full enough already!

===== 2026-05-08 | Friday 8 May, 2026 =====
Out of office? Cambridge in the Summer? Quote of the Day ”Holy Mother we do believe, That without sin Thou didst conceive; May we now in Thee believing, Also sin without conceiving.” A.P. Herbert My late mother, a very devout Catholic, would not have been amused. ## Musical alternative to the morning’s radio news Haydn | Cello Concerto No. 1 in C Major | II. Adagio | Yo-Yo Ma Link Long Read of the Day The Myth of the Informed Citizen Nicholas Carr is one of the best communicators of our age. He’s terrific at diving into academic and other research on a topic and then coming up with a readable exegesis of what he’s found. His most recent book, Superbloom is coming out in paperback around now, and this essay is taken from it. In it, he traces the evolution of the thinking of Walter Lippmann, one of the most interesting American intellectuals of the 20th century &#8212; and also one of the early members of the ’neoliberal thought collective’ that seized the ideological initiative from the late 1960s onwards and shaped the world we now inhabit. Sample: In 1919, Lippmann wrote a despairing essay in the Atlantic Monthly titled “The Basic Problem of Democracy.” Democracy’s founding ideal—that of a well-informed citizenry capable of making reasoned judgments about national problems and plans—had come into being in a much simpler time, he argued, when most concerns were local and people had direct experience of them. The assumptions of America’s founders, a small, insular, largely agrarian elite, held little relevance to the bustling modern world, with its urban and industrial energies and lightning-quick communications. Society was much more complex now, and people’s sense of it came not from their own first-hand observations but through information received “at second, third, or fourth hand.” The public’s understanding of social and political issues was fated to be incomplete, distorted, and easily manipulated. “The world about which each man is supposed to have opinions has become so complicated as to defy his powers of understanding,” Lippmann wrote… Worth your time. My commonplace booklet Ever wonder why Warren Buffett, arguably the most successful investors of the 20th century, said this? “The worst sort of business is one that grows rapidly, requires significant capital to engender the growth, and then earns little or no money. Think airlines. Here a durable competitive advantage has proven elusive ever since the days of the Wright Brothers. Indeed, if a farsighted capitalist had been present at Kitty Hawk, he would have done his successors a huge favor by shooting Orville down.” For an answer, try David Oks’s splendid article, “Why airlines are always going bankrupt” ! This Blog is also available as an email three days a week. If you think that might suit you better, why not subscribe ? One email on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays delivered to your inbox at 5am UK time. It’s free, and you can always unsubscribe if you conclude your inbox is full enough already!

===== 2026-05-11 | Monday 11 May, 2026 =====
Alliums ahoy! Some striking white ones in the Orchard in Grantchester on Friday afternoon. Quote of the Day “Computers are useless. They can only give you answers.” Picasso Musical alternative to the morning’s radio news Louis Armstrong | What A Wonderful World Link The BBC put on a wonderful — and moving — celebration of David Attenborough’s 100th birth in the Albert Hall on Friday night, which ended with a recording of him reading the lyrics of this song against a backdrop of clips from his many films. Long Read of the Day In the belly of the MrBeast Remarkable analysis by Kevin Munger of MrBeast , the world’s most successful YouTuber. One nice thing about studying social media through the lens of creators and influencers is that some of them are quite forthcoming about their experiences; that’s the nature of the gig. But others are more committed to their persona, to maintaining some distance between themselves and the content. The most famous of these is, of course, the world-conquering MrBeast, owner of the most-subscribed YouTube channel (343 million). MrBeast rose to fame through outrageous acts of charity, and occasionally engages in stunt-giving. This is a meaty phenomenon for wordcels trying to understand MrBeast; we can bring any number of critical frames to bear on questions of whether this is altruistic, whether it actually has good effects, what the normative experience of the viewer is…what it means to fit out 2,000 amputees with new protheses, like in the most recent video. This is a mistake. As I argued in the conclusion of The YouTube Apparatus (now free to download!), “Communication within the YouTube Apparatus has no meaning.” The rapid feedback loop between creators and audiences (as constructed by platform metrics) means that the system more and more responds to itself. Rather than trying to go somewhere (as is the case with political ideology), the creator seeks simply intensification, to draw more and more of the world into his whirlpool of content… Read on. It’s eye-opening. And an example of media ecology done well. Books, etc. Many years ago I read and enjoyed Gerald Durrell’s My Family and Other Animals so when the TV adaptation, The Durrells appeared we tuned in and watched it. And then I got the book which incorporates it and two of his other books. Turns out that the TV adaptation is only loosely related to the books, so the exercise turned into a reflection on the differences between the two media. The most glaring inconsistencies were in the portrayals of the long-suffering Mrs Durrell, the mother of this extraordinary tribe, and Spiro, the Greek taxi-driver who became the family’s loyal friend and retainer. In the books, Ma Durrell is portrayed as a modest peace-maker who mostly has her nose in a cookery book, whereas in the TV adaptation she becomes a glamorous model who is lusted after by a series of unsuitable males. And Spiro is transformed from a scowling but helpful gargoyle into a handsome and desirable chat. Like I said, different media for different folks. My Commonplace booklet Gilded Age 2.0 Mr and Mrs Moneybags at the Met Ball Screenshot Link Linkblog Something I noticed, while drinking from the Internet firehose. Where in the world are the Nibmeisters? This is not the kind of question that keeps 99.9999% of humanity awake at night. A nibmeister is someone who can improve or reform a nib. Nibmeisters are like the alchemists of the pen world; they can take a nib that isn’t functioning properly or isn’t to your liking and turn it into gold (not literally, unless it is gold, but you get the picture). And if you’re a fountain-pen geek like this blogger, it’s important to know where the nearest one is. Turns out there are just two of them in the UK — and you can find where they are here ! This Blog is also available as an email three days a week. If you think that might suit you better, why not subscribe ? One email on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays delivered to your inbox at 5am UK time. It’s free, and you can always unsubscribe if you conclude your inbox is full enough already! &lt;hr&lt;

===== 2026-05-13 | Wednesday 13 May, 2026 =====
The Wedding Party Quote of the Day ”Having to read footnotes resembles having to go downstairs to answer the door while in the midst of making love.” Noel Coward Musical alternative to the morning’s radio news Handel | Waft her, Angels, through the skies (Jephtha) | Thomas Cooley | Voices of Music Link Long Read of the Day Freedom of Navigation A salutary read by Scott Galloway about the systemic implications of Trump’s private war on Iran. Since the start of the war, prices of urea and ammonia — the two most common nitrogen fertilizers — have risen by 65% and 40%, respectively. An estimated 30% of the world’s fertilizer passes through the strait, further straining already crimped global fertilizer production. In Russia, the world’s No. 1 fertilizer exporter, plants have been targeted by Ukrainian drones; one recent attack temporarily knocked out 5% of Russian production capacity. China, the second-biggest exporter, banned exports to guard domestic supply. In the U.S., higher fertilizer prices will hurt some farmers more than others, depending on their location and whether they bought fertilizer ahead of the spring planting season. U.S. futures markets have already priced in higher fertilizer costs, but if the strait remains closed into the summer, next year’s food prices will rise. For poor nations, the crisis is here. An estimated 500 million farmers produce 70% of the world’s food supply on farms smaller than 24 acres. Their margin for error is zero. The longer supply chains remain jammed, the worse it gets. One analytics firm estimates that a six-month disruption will spike global food prices by 12% to 18% above pre-war levels by the end of the year. Germany’s Kiel Institute predicts food-price inflation will reach 30% in Zambia, 11% in India, and 8% in Venezuela within a year. By midyear, the World Bank estimates 45 million people, mostly in developing nations, will experience acute hunger. According to Michael Werz of the Council on Foreign Relations, we’re witnessing a “slow-motion famine machine.” Compounding the suffering, wealthy nations cut development assistance 23% from 2024 to 2025. As a UN official told the Economist, “The humanitarian shock absorber isn’t there anymore.” As always with Galloway, it’s a brisk read. Here’s his payoff para: The nightmare scenario isn’t worldwide toll booths or even simultaneous blockades. We can tolerate higher prices and more frequent disruptions. What we shouldn’t tolerate is a descent into gangsterism. In the U.S., Donald Trump has undermined capitalism and the rule of law. (See: TikTok, tariffs, deploying prosecutions to attack Fed independence and political opponents, etc.) Trump’s strategic incompetence in Iran is exporting gangsterism to the world. In effect, we’re trading in our world policeman badge for regional protection rackets. That’s not the art of the deal, but the illusion of the steal. The question isn’t whether America has the economic and military firepower to prosper in Trump’s gangster paradise, but what we lose when we abandon the rules-based order we helped create. A: Everything. In an AI abundant age, the rarest commodity will be people to verify its output My most recent Observer column … Way back in 1971, the economist (and Nobel laureate) Herbert Simon made an eerily prescient observation. The world was entering an era when information was becoming abundant and he was wondering what the long-term implications of this “infoglut” would be. His answer was simple. “A wealth of information”, he said, “creates a poverty of attention and a need to allocate that attention efﬁciently among the overabundance of information sources that might consume it.” Interestingly, Simon was thinking about this before the internet that we use today existed. His seminal thought – that attention would become the scarce (and therefore valuable) commodity of the networked world – turned out to be the basis for a huge industry built on capturing and monetising human attention. Mark Zuckerberg, Elon Musk, the Google founders and a host of other tech bros have made billions from it. And we’ve been living with the consequences of that ever since. But now there’s a new ﻿general-purpose technology﻿﻿ on the block – AI – and it raises the same question that preoccupied Simon decades ago: what will be super﻿abundant in an AI-dominated world? And what will be scarce? The most intriguing attempt at an answer I’ve seen so far has recently come from a trio of American researchers in 

===== 2026-05-15 | Friday 15 May, 2026 =====
Word-processing, old-style Quote of the Day ”One of my greatest pleasures in my writing has come from the thought that perhaps my work might annoy someone of comfortably pretentious position. Then comes the realization that such people rarely read.” John Kenneth Galbraith Musical alternative to the morning’s radio news The Rolling Stones | Start Me Up Link} One of my favourite tracks. Microsoft payed a fortune for the rights to use it on the launch of Windows 95. Which was a rather nice joke, given that you had to press &#8216;Start' not only to boot up, but also in order to shut down, your Windows PC. Long Read of the Day Will our Hyper-Gilded Age Usher in Genuine Populism? Lovely essay by Paul Krugman. It’s clear that we are not experiencing a mere replay of the reign of the robber barons. We are living through something much worse. The tech bros make the “malefactors of great wealth” called out by Theodore Roosevelt look benign by comparison. Some widely used measures of inequality suggest that income disparities, which soared in the 1980s and 1990s, have plateaued since then. But the concentration of wealth at the top is continuing to soar. Today’s oligarchs control a huge share of America’s wealth — much larger than their share even at the end of the 1980s. … Tellingly, unlike the robber barons of yore, many modern plutocrats show little sense of gratitude for their good fortune, little inclination to give back to society by devoting a significant part of their wealth to good works… More important than the stinginess of the superrich, however, is the fact that their wealth has brought great political power, arguably more than the robber barons ever possessed — power that they abuse on an epic scale… Actually, it’s bought political power. Which is where the question of a populist backlash comes in. Books, etc. This is one of the two great books about the banking crash of 2008. (The other is Adam Tooze’s Crashed .) I read it ages ago and had forgotten about it until the other day when I had a conversation at breakfast with one of our Press Fellows about good reporting of the banking industry. So I took it down from the shelf and started to re-read. And then was reminded of why I was so riveted by it first time round. One of the things that makes Tett such a good commentator (she’s an FT columnist) is that she was trained as an anthropologist and so can sniff hypocrisy and greed at 50 paces. My commonplace booklet To infinity and, well…, lunch Screenshot A kind reader sent me this wonderful pic by the great wildlife photographer, Yanny Liu . This Blog is also available as an email three days a week. If you think that might suit you better, why not subscribe ? One email on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays delivered to your inbox at 5am UK time. It’s free, and you can always unsubscribe if you conclude your inbox is full enough already!

===== 2026-05-18 | Monday 18 May,2026 =====
Oi! Where’s our grub? Screenshot We have a bird box in our garden which is used every year by Blue Tits. On Saturday I noticed that the fledglings were getting shirty about the Deliveroo service being provided by their (exhausted) parents. This is a still from the video I made of their impatience. By the time you read this they will have flown the nest and hopefully have learned to feed themselves! Quote of the Day Most economists will acknowledge that technological progress can cause some adjustment problems in the short run. What is rarely noted is that the short run can be a lifetime." Carl Benedikt Frey (Which is why so many young people are increasingly pissed off by the arrogant insouciance of techbros about the glorious future that AI will (allegedly) bring. See Brian Merchant’s blog post on “AI as the new Avatar of American capitalism” for some insights into this backlash. Musical alternative to the morning’s radio news Randy Newman | Losing You Link Funny how music reaches parts of us that nothing else touches. Long Read of the Day A lovely essay by Henry Reichman in The Hedgehog Review on the way Gen Z literary culture reduces famous authors to symbolic mascots to be summarised in performative Instagram snippets. In this case, the case study is the way Joan Didion is being somehow trivialised. She was a much more formidable author than you’d guess from anything you’ll find on social media. “But”, as Reichman observes, if we wish to discard the aesthetics around her and probe her often incendiary, frequently incisive, and always entertaining commentary, we are faced with the question: What is it, exactly, that the works of Didion can say about our current political and cultural behavior fifty, sixty years on? Much of our political landscape in 2026 is fraught and bewildering, and the advantage of turning to a text like Slouching Towards Bethlehem at this moment is that it paints a timely portrait of an America struggling with deep societal conflict and teetering toward chaos. The places and events that Didion samples in the late Sixties—a time of unpopular foreign involvements, identity-based unrest at home, and a divisive, enigmatic national government—make right now an instructive time to read Slouching . Right on. Social media is turning us into mobile couch potatoes Yesterday’s Observer column : ext time you’re out in public and have time to kill, imagine you’re an anthropologist and do some people-watching. Notice that almost everyone who’s on their own — in a cafe, a train, waiting for a bus, queueing to board a plane — is looking at their phone. And what are they doing? Mostly scrolling or flicking endlessly through a feed of images, short videos or text messages. I once stood behind a young woman in a queue to board a delayed Ryanair flight, and for the best part of 30 minutes she simply scrolled through Pinterest images without stopping at a single one. She was clearly bored out of her mind. Occasionally, you’ll see someone listening to a podcast or reading an article but even then they’re not typing or interacting with the device. And, like the woman in the queue, they often seem listless, displaying a quiet passivity that reveals an awkward truth: we have morphed into mobile couch potatoes — consumers of content curated by algorithms, transmitted by people we don’t know to be viewed on the tiny screens we now carry with us everywhere. This passivity is a real phenomenon. The idea that the “unprofessionalised, uncommodified, unrefined masses” are quietly opting out of public posting — has hardened from speculation into something closer to empirical fact. Internal Meta charts unsealed during US antitrust hearings showed that the share of content posted by users’ actual contacts on Facebook fell from 22% in 2023 to 17% in 2025, and nearly a third of users now post less than they did just a year ago. On Instagram, it dropped from 11% to 7%. There’s also the discovery that time spent on social media peaked in 2022 and has since gone into steady decline … Read on This Blog is also available as an email three days a week. If you think that might suit you better, why not subscribe ? One email on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays delivered to your inbox at 5am UK time. It’s free, and you can always unsubscribe if you conclude your inbox is full enough already!

===== 2026-05-20 | Wednesday 20 May, 2026 =====
A tale of two kisses Robert Doisneau’s famous photograph of two carefree lovers outside the Hotel de Ville in Paris is 1950 must be one of the best-known images in the world. The picture, he later said, “represented a perfect fantasy. It encapsulates the world’s view of Paris as the city of love and freedom.” And now, another Parisian kiss, this time from May 14, 1941. It shows a woman saying goodbye to her husband, probably for good. That day, some 3,700 foreign-born Jews obeyed a summons by Paris police with a notice, printed on light green paper (it became known as the “green ticket roundup”), for what they believed would merely be a check of their immigration and identity papers. The operation was organized by a man named Theodor Dannecker, the envoy of Adolf Eichmann in Paris. A photographer with the Nazi propaganda unit in the city was on hand to observe. Source Note that the policemen in the picture overseeing proceedings are French gendarmes , not SS thugs. You can perhaps see why some of us balk at the notion of “European civilisation”. Europe, after all, is the continent that — in a single century — hosted two of the bloodiest wars in human history. Quote of the Day ”If an opinion contrary to your own makes you angry, that is a sign that you are subconsciously aware of having no good reason for thinking as you do.” Bertrand Russell Musical alternative to the morning’s radio news Francesco Geminiani | Concerto Grosso nr 11 E major (after Corelli op. V) Link New to me, and lovely. Long Read of the Day Homer Simpson may be the best AI commentator we have right now An insightful essay by Martha Lane Fox. Artificial intelligence is becoming a bit like alcohol. The cause of, and solution to, all of life’s problems. Not my line. Homer Simpson’s. But it may be the most accurate description of this entire AI moment. Public debate about AI swings constantly between two extremes. On one side: the evangelists. Productivity boom. Unlimited growth. A new industrial revolution. On the other: the alarmists. Mass unemployment. Social collapse. Machines replacing humans. Most people are not living at either extreme. Neither am I. But one thing feels increasingly clear: the next challenge in AI is not simply capability. It is legitimacy. Partly because of this, I am chairing a new taskforce for the Mayor of London looking at AI, jobs and the future of work across the capital. We are intentionally keeping it practical, evidence-led and short-term. No mission creep. No speculative AGI debates. The focus is on what is already changing inside organisations before it fully appears in unemployment statistics: hiring, training, progression, management and job design. Because the labour market is already shifting… Do read on. She’s a fountain of common sense about the technology. My commonplace booklet AI aces a literary prize? From the Guardian : A few syntactical tics – and the verdict of an AI detection platform – have sparked a furore over the possibility that a short story given a prestigious literary award was written by AI. The foundation that awarded the prize and Granta, the magazine that published the winning story, said they had considered the allegations but had not reached a conclusion as to whether they were true. “It may be that the judges have now awarded a prize to an instance of AI plagiarism – we don’t yet know, and perhaps we never will know,” the publisher of Granta, Sigrid Rausing, said. The Serpent in the Grove was named as the winning entry for the Commonwealth prize from the Caribbean on Saturday and published in Granta magazine. Hmmm… I’n not convinced by the so-called ‘AI detection’ machines either. Chart of the Day What people use ChatGPT for. Screenshot Source: OpenAI Feedback Readers have pointed out that my Observer column on Sunday was behind the paywall. For a pdf version, see here . This Blog is also available as an email three days a week. If you think that might suit you better, why not subscribe ? One email on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays delivered to your inbox at 5am UK time. It’s free, and you can always unsubscribe if you conclude your inbox is full enough already!

===== 2026-05-22 | Friday 22 May, 2026 =====
Colosseus In the end, electrification is the best way to slow climate change. Quote of the Day ”I love criticism just so long as it's unqualified praise.” * Noel Coward Musical alternative to the morning’s radio news Crosby, Stills & Nash with James Taylor and Emmylou Harris | ”Teach Your Children" Link Long Read of the Day The Reality of AI and the Crisis of Meaning At the moment I’m spending a lot of time and energy on trying to find ways of talking about AI to people and groups who are puzzled, excited or fearful about it. Because the public discourse about the technology is so chaotic, this isn’t easy. What Henry Farrell calls “the AI Fight Club” makes it difficult to extract a sensible signal from the noise, or even to steer a rational course through the pandemonium. All of which is a long-winded way of explaining why I was struck by this link sent by a good friend of mine. It's to a speech given by Matthew Harvey Sanders to — of all things — a conference of the Catholic bishops of England and Wales. Here’s a sample: Just one week ago — the company Anthropic released a new frontier model called Claude Opus 4.7. It has a one-million-token context window, which means it can hold something like a full-length theological library in its working memory at once. It scores close to eighty-eight percent on a benchmark that measures autonomous software engineering. On another benchmark, called Humanity’s Last Exam — a test deliberately built from doctoral-level questions across dozens of fields, designed to be a generational barrier — this model is now clearing more than half of the questions with the right tools. Eighteen months ago, that benchmark was considered unreachable. Last week, it was cleared. The same lab announced, earlier this month, something that makes the release of Opus 4.7 the second most important item of news from one company in a single fortnight. They’ve been running a project called Glasswing. The partners include Amazon, Apple, Broadcom, Cisco, Google, JPMorgan Chase, the Linux Foundation, Microsoft, NVIDIA, and Palo Alto Networks. The reason those partners are in the room is that Anthropic has trained an unreleased frontier model — they’re calling it Mythos Preview — that has autonomously discovered thousands of previously unknown security flaws in every major operating system and every major web browser in the world. One flaw it found in OpenBSD — one of the most security-hardened operating systems ever built — had been there, unnoticed, for twenty-seven years. Another, in the video software that sits inside countless consumer devices, had been missed by five million automated tests. A single model found it. I want you to sit with what that means, pastorally. The digital civilisation in which your people live, bank, work, and confide their secrets is more fragile than any of them knows. And it’s now being examined — for the first time in history — by machines more capable than the best human engineers. The bishops of England and Wales aren’t going to be patching operating systems. But you’re going to be pastoring a people who live inside a digital infrastructure that the experts themselves no longer fully understand, and whose custody has passed into the hands of a very small number of companies on a very specific coastline. Keep that in the back of your mind. We’ll come back to it before the hour is done… Worth you time. Books, etc. I had lunch yesterday with Hugo Drochon, a friend and former colleague who now teaches political history at Nottingham, and he suddenly pulled this out of his briefcase, signed it and handed it over. It’s his new book about the unpalatable reality that liberal democracies have always been ruled by elites, which of course is what populists complain about. But when they gain power it turns out that they have their own elites who run things. Just think of Pete Hegseth, Stephen Miller and the other creeps currently running the US. Hugo argues that democracy is more accurately and usefully understood as a perpetual struggle among competing elites and that real political change only comes from the interaction between social movements and elite political institutions such as parties. I think the aim of the book is to lay the groundwork for a theory of ‘dynamic democracy’ as an ongoing process of challenging elite rule, which sounds depressing enough to be realistic. I’m only on Chapter One, though, so hopefully I’m wrong. This Blog is also available as an email three days a

===== 2026-05-25 | Monday 25 May, 2026 =====
Welcome to Cambridge Quote of the Day ”The fact that an opinion has been widely held is no evidence whatever that it is not utterly absurd.” Bertrand Russell Musical alternative to the morning’s radio news Bob Dylan & the Grateful Dead | Pledging My Time | (May/June 1987 Rehearsals) Link Long Read of the Day The "Learned Helplessness" Of 2026 What happens when a mad king rules and liberal democracy disappears into thin air. Prescient (and utterly depressing) essay by Andrew Sullivan. Here’s a sample: If I were to describe my own state of mind observing the world and America right now, “learned helplessness” is pretty close. You may well be feeling it too. Each day, you read the news and see something completely beyond belief and yet feel utterly disempowered to do or even say anything about it. And then another story hits you again. And another. Again. And again. Trump shocks and shocks and shocks you some more. Even after all these years, you take it in the gut each time. And he feels nothing. This has been his entire life. What the mad king announced this week — that he has not just pardoned but will now financially reward all the thugs who attacked the police and desecrated the Congress on January 6 — is the latest shock from the Trump taser. Another one hits when you find out he’s also exempted himself and his entire family from any past or future tax audits by the IRS. Then another one, as we learn he is making countless stock trades for huge amounts in companies very much affected by federal policy: The new financial disclosure reports cover the first three months of 2026 …showing a cumulative value of between $220 million and around $750 million. The purchases included ​securities linked to companies such as Microsoft, Meta Platforms, Oracle, Broadcom, Bank of America and Goldman Sachs. Trump does not have a blind trust; it’s a revocable one managed by his sons and an old buddy. And if you think Trump maintains a saintly distance from how his own money is invested, well, you should join the administration. It’s where amoral tools like Todd Blanche belong. It’s hard to put it better than Derek Thompson: Within one 24-hour period, Trump: got out of a $100 million IRS fine, secured “immunity” from all future tax investigations for his family and friends, created a $1.8 billion slush fund for lawbreaking supporters, and was reported for likely insider trading worth nearly $1 billion. … Nobody even tries to defend it. As for the "learned helplessness", is it just a confirmation that fear is viral, or a revelation of a deeper truth: that most people are not interested in politics (or indeed in governance), which explains why liberal democracy rots from within. Sigh. Ukraine has taught us that drones are the new machine gun My latest Observer column wo truisms: armies are always preparing for the last war; and military necessity is the mother of invention. Britain learned about the latter with radar in the late 1930s. The Ukrainians did the same in February 2022, when Vladimir Putin’s forces invaded their country, and they have turned out to be very fast learners. In particular, they spotted the potential of drones; specifically consumer models adapted for military use. Their imaginative use of the technology has allowed them to inflict casualty rates as high as five to one on Russian forces in recent months, while giving up little or no territory. More than 96% of those casualties are estimated to have been caused by drones. This means that the age of the infantryman is coming to an end. Ukraine has shown that drones can incapacitate battleships and disable tanks, but their most devastating lesson for Russian soldiers is that being seen in the open is like signing your own death warrant. Surviving or avoiding a drone attack has become an almost impossible task on the battlefield. If you doubt that (and have a strong stomach), then a video montage of Ukrainian drones hunting down Russian troops – even in the interiors of buildings into which they have fled – should give you an idea of what the technology can do, and why the enemy’s mortality rate is so high. Coincidentally, drone capability on the battlefield seems to have rendered even the most skilled humans redundant… Read on May be behind a paywall. Pdf version here . Books, etc. This might be interesting. Here’s the blurb: Liberalism has always suffered from messaging challenges. It simultaneously implies a pursuit of individual liberty and social equality, two 

===== 2026-05-27 | Wednesday 27 May, 2026 =====
A new villager arrives! Spotted on an evening walk the other day. Quote of the Day "I think there are two realities. Yes, AI is far better than a lot of people realize. And yes, it is still pretty bad at a lot of stuff that a lot of people care about (and it may stay that way). Anyone making bets about the future on either side should bear that in mind." Will Douglas Heaven, writing in MIT Tech Review Musical alternative to the morning’s radio news Felicity Lott RIP Mozart | *Ach, ich fühl's | Die Zauberflöte | Felicity Lott Link Wonderful soprano, now gone, alas. Long Read of the Day Muskism as Fordism When Elon Musk first started making cars I remember thinking that he was the spiritual heir of Henry Ford. Why? Because Musk invented not just a new kind of vehicle, but also a new way of making cars. Henry Ford did the same, with the Model T and the production line. The comparison was, in a way, just the cheap throwaway line of a newspaper columnist. But what’s fascinating about this Long Read by Quinn Slobodian and Ben Tarnoff is what they do with this parallel. It’s long but really worth your time. So brew some coffee and settle down. Sample: Musk’s startlingly literal belief in the power of the internet reflects a kind of memetic determinism. The internet does not just reflect the world: in the last decade, for him, it has become the world. Offline processes are downstream from things that happen on the web, and specifically on the platform that Musk himself owns and frequently manipulates toward his own political preferences. This point of view is not pure delusion. One similarity between Musk and Ford is the extreme illiquidity of their personal wealth. Almost all of Ford’s fortune was in his Ford stock, which was privately held until almost a decade after his death. Unlike other tycoons like John D. Rockefeller and Andrew S. Mellon, Ford was not diversified, and remained distant from Wall Street, seeing it as the domain of parasites—and, notably, he believed, Jews. Musk is similarly idiosyncratic in the structure of his wealth. It is almost entirely held in the stock of his own companies. As he put it in an interview, “if Tesla and SpaceX went bankrupt, I would go bankrupt too immediately.” This is key to understanding the political economy of Muskism. Musk’s business model is built not around steady production or long-term profitability, but around the continuous projection of outsized promises—of pending technological breakthroughs, planetary salvation, and financial windfalls. These claims generate asset price inflation through the harvest of attention. Because, a “A bicycle bell that outsmarts even smart headphones stock price is only ever the price that people are willing to pay on a given day, it can change very quickly—as Tesla’s often does, swinging 10 percent or more from day to day. The bubble needs to stay inflated. Over time, this strategy matured into an outright control of the means of narrative production: Musk eventually acquired a global media platform to propagate belief in his own future lucrativeness… My commonplace booklet I’m a cyclist and am constantly appalled by seeing cyclists and pedestrians wearing noise-cancelling headphones as they cycle on busy roads or walk on crowded pavements. Why do so many young people want to isolate themselves from their environment when they’re outdoors? And don’t they realise that wearing noice-cancelling headphones in such circumstances implies a tacit death wish? All of which is just a way of said that the Škoda Duobell , a bicycle bell that can get an alert even into noise-cancelling headphones, looks like a welcome innovation. What’s even cooler about it is that it provides an analogue solution to a digital problem. It’s a mechanical device that deceives ‘smart’ headphone algorithms and increases the probability that pedestrians will detect its sound. So what I want to know now is where I can buy one. It doesn’t seem to be on sale yet. Growl. Chart of the Day I think it was Keynes who said that markets can remain buoyant for longer than you can remain solvent. But the current insane discrepancy between corporate valuations and reality goes way beyond that. The SpaceX IPO filing says, at one point, “We have a history of net losses and may not achieve profitability in the future.” . (h/t Adam Tooze) This Blog is also available as an email three days a week. If you think that might suit you better, why not subscribe ? One email on Mondays, Wednesdays and

===== 2026-05-29 | Friday 29 May, 2026 =====
Popping up I know, I know, it looks as though we are starting an opium farm. But they just popped up in a part of the vegetable bed that was lying fallow with no encouragement from us. Quote of the Day ”People are wrong when they say opera is not what it used to be. It is what it used to be. That is what's wrong with it.” Noel Coward I disagree. That’s exactly what’s right about it. Musical alternative to the morning’s radio news Dick Gaughan | Ruby Tuesday Link Long Read of the Day The Hidden Cost of Automated Thinking Thinking about the intrinsic inexplicability of LLMs reminded me of this lovely essay by the Harvard legal scholar Jonathan Zittrain about ‘intellectual debt’. And so I dug it out and re-read it. It’s as good as I remembered. And strangely prescient, given that it was published in 2019. Here’s how it opens: Like many medications, the wakefulness drug modafinil, which is marketed under the trade name Provigil, comes with a small, tightly folded paper pamphlet. For the most part, its contents—lists of instructions and precautions, a diagram of the drug’s molecular structure—make for anodyne reading. The subsection called “Mechanism of Action,” however, contains a sentence that might induce sleeplessness by itself: “The mechanism(s) through which modafinil promotes wakefulness is unknown.” Provigil isn’t uniquely mysterious. Many drugs receive regulatory approval, and are widely prescribed, even though no one knows exactly how they work. This mystery is built into the process of drug discovery, which often proceeds by trial and error. Each year, any number of new substances are tested in cultured cells or animals; the best and safest of those are tried out in people. In some cases, the success of a drug promptly inspires new research that ends up explaining how it works—but not always. Aspirin was discovered in 1897, and yet no one convincingly explained how it worked until 1995. The same phenomenon exists elsewhere in medicine. Deep-brain stimulation involves the implantation of electrodes in the brains of people who suffer from specific movement disorders, such as Parkinson’s disease; it’s been in widespread use for more than twenty years, and some think it should be employed for other purposes, including general cognitive enhancement. No one can say how it works. This approach to discovery—answers first, explanations later—accrues what I call intellectual debt. It’s possible to discover what works without knowing why it works, and then to put that insight to use immediately, assuming that the underlying mechanism will be figured out later. In some cases, we pay off this intellectual debt quickly. But, in others, we let it compound, relying, for decades, on knowledge that’s not fully known. In the past, intellectual debt has been confined to a few areas amenable to trial-and-error discovery, such as medicine. But that may be changing, as new techniques in artificial intelligence—specifically, machine learning—increase our collective intellectual credit line… Do read on. It’s good. Books, etc. Kieran Setiya has an interesting essay about David Edmond’s biography of “the most famous philosopher most people have never heard of”, Derek Parfit. I never knew him, but I’ve always been intrigued by him, partly because he was married to a lovely former colleague of mine, and also because he was an interesting photographer . He was also, in some respects, a caricature of academic impracticability. One nice quote from Setiya’s piece captures this elegantly: Parfit’s theory of personal identity as fundamentally psychological, not physical, is echoed in his relationship to his own body, which he treats, according to a friend and colleague, ‘like a mildly inconvenient golf cart he has to drive around in order to get his mind from Oxford to Boston to New York to New Brunswick’.” That fits neatly with the image of him conveyed in “How to be Good” a memorable New Yorker profile of him by Larissa MacFarquhar published in 2011. In the way that he moves and carries himself, Parfit gives the impression of one who is unaware of being looked at, perhaps because he spends so much time alone. He clutches his computer bag. He fidgets. His hair is white and fluffy and has settled into a pageboy of the kind that was fashionable for men in the fifteenth century. He wears the same outfit every day: white shirt, black trousers. There is something not-there about him, an unphysical, slightly androgynous quality. He lacks the normal a